---
title: "Run a template"
description: "How to run a Pathway Template."
navigation: true
heading: false
toc: false
---

# Run a Pathway Template

The Pathway Templates provide ready-to-use setups for creating real-time, AI-driven applications.
With YAML-configured templates, it's easy to customize or create your own processing pipelines for use cases like RAG and ETL.

This quick start guide will help you set up and run a Pathway Template.
Whether you're developing an ETL pipeline, a document indexing solution, a knowledge mining system, or a query-response interface, this guide will get you started quickly.

## Prerequisites

To get started, you'll need:
- Git to clone the repository and manage updates.
- LLM API Key (e.g., OpenAI or Hugging Face) for embedding and querying models, if needed.

**Running Options**
1. Docker (recommended) will install all dependencies automatically.
2. Python 3.8+ with [Pathway](/developers/user-guide/introduction/installation) if you prefer a local setup.

**Note**: if you are using RAG pipelines locally, you will need to install Pathway LLM xpack with:

```
pip install pathway[all]
```

**Optional**: Install Streamlit for UI and pip for dependency management (if not using Docker).


## Clone the Repository

First, you need to download the repository.

For ETL templates, clone Pathway repository:
```
git clone https://github.com/pathwaycom/pathway.git
```

For RAG templates, you need to clone the dedicated repository:
```
git clone https://github.com/pathwaycom/llm-app.git
```


## Selecting Your Template

Pathway Templates provide several ready-to-go templates for common use cases.
Whether you need a real-time ETL, document indexing, or context-based Q&A, you'll find templates for each.

::container{.flex .gap-8 .items-center .w-full .justify-center}
    ::pathway-button{icon="uil:github" type="secondary" href="/developers/templates#llm"}
    See the templates.
    ::
::

Then you need to go the repository of the chosen template, let's take the `demo-question-answering` as an example.

```
cd llm-app/examples/pipelines/demo-question-answering
```

## Configuring Pathway Templates

Most of the templates can be configured using a YAML file.
You can learn how to configure them by reading the [dedicated tutorial](/developers/templates/configure-yaml).

For non-YAML templates, the detailed configuration and usage steps can be found in the the README and articles included with each template.

## Run a Template
You can run Pathway Templates either locally or using Docker.

### Self-hosting
The exact information about how to run a given template is given in the dedicated article or GitHub repository.
In general, the templates can be run in two different ways:
- Manually: by running the main Python file (usually called `main.py`). You'll need to install the dependencies manually.
- With Docker: by using `docker compose up` if a `docker-compose.yml` file is provided. The setup is automated, handling all required dependencies.

### On the Cloud
Local and Docker deployment may be not enough.
Most cloud platforms offer robust support for Docker containers and/or Python deployment, allowing you to deploy your Pathway project on these cloud environments without encountering compatibility issues.

You can learn more about how to deploy a Pathway Template in the cloud [here](/developers/templates/deploy/cloud-deployment).

### Pathway for Enterprise
If you want to scale your Pathway application, you may be interested in our Pathway for Enterprise.

You can learn more about Pathway Enterprise [here](/features/).
