---
title: Cloud Deployment of Pathway Live Data Framework
description: 'A guide about how to deploy Pathway Live Data Framework applications using the cloud'
---

# Cloud Deployment of Pathway Live Data Framework

Local and docker deployment may be not enough.
If you want to scale your application, you may be interested in Pathway Live Data Framework Enterprise.
The Pathway Live Data Framework Enterprise is specially tailored towards end-to-end data processing and real time intelligent analytics.
It scales using distributed computing on the cloud and supports Kubernetes deployment.

## Deploying on the cloud
Most cloud platforms offer robust support for Docker containers and/or Python deployment, allowing you to deploy your project on these cloud environments without encountering compatibility issues.
You can easily benefit from the scalability and flexibility of cloud deployment.
You can follow our tutorials to deploy on the most common cloud providers:
 - [**Google Cloud**](/developers/user-guide/deployment/gcp-deploy)
 - [**AWS**](/developers/user-guide/deployment/aws-fargate-deploy)
 - [**Azure**](/developers/user-guide/deployment/azure-aci-deploy)
 - [**Nebius AI Cloud**](/developers/user-guide/deployment/nebius-deploy)



### Deploying a Pathway Live Data Framework web service with Render.
Using tools like Render, deploying your web service can be done in a few clicks.
Read [the tutorial](/developers/user-guide/deployment/render-deploy) to learn how to do it.

### Data streaming for real-time enterprise AI apps with Azure
You can see how to build a real-time data pipeline with Azure Event Hubs, Pathway Live Data Framework, and Azure OpenAI in our associated [GitHub repository](https://github.com/pathway-labs/azure-openai-real-time-data-app).

## Distributed deployment
A multi-server (distributed) deployment can use Kubernetes and its cloud implementations. The Pathway Live Data Framework assumes a stateful set deployment with all pods present for a successful operation. The Pathway Live Data Framework Enterprise covers distributed multi-server deployment for production use. Support with integration into existing helm charts and k8s tooling is provided.

You can learn more about Pathway Live Data Framework Enterprise [here](/pricing).
