---
title: Get help
description: 'This page references where to look for help if you have an issue using Pathway'
---

::landing-section
#title
How can we help you?

#default
We're here to help you make the most of your experience. Whether you're a beginner or an experienced developer, this page provides resources to assist you with common issues and inquiries.

    ::card-grid
    #default
        ::landing-card
        ---
        icon: 'heroicons:bolt-solid'
        button:
            text: 'Get Pathway'
            href: '/developers/user-guide/introduction/welcome/'
        ---
        #title
        Getting started

        #default
        Trouble installing Pathway? Take a look a our installation guide.
        ::
        ::landing-card
        ---
        icon: 'heroicons:book-open-20-solid'
        button:
            text: 'See the API docs'
            href: '/developers/api-docs/pathway/'
        ---
        #title
        API docs.

        #default
        Wondering how to use a specific feature of Pathway? The answer to your question is likely in the API docs.
        ::
        ::landing-card
        ---
        icon: 'heroicons:wrench-screwdriver-20-solid'
        button:
            text: 'See more'
            href: '/developers/user-guide/development/troubleshooting/'
        ---
        #title
        Troubleshooting

        #default
        You got an error? Try to debug your code with the troubleshooting guide.
        ::
    ::    
    ::card-grid
    #default
        ::landing-card
        ---
        icon: 'uil:github'
        button:
            text: 'Open a GitHub issue'
            href: 'https://github.com/pathwaycom/pathway/issues'
        ---
        #title
        GitHub issues

        #default
        If you've identified a bug, have a feature request, or need technical support, open an issue on GitHub.
        ::
        ::landing-card
        ---
        icon: 'uil:discord'
        button:
            text: 'Join us on Discord'
            href: 'https://discord.com/invite/pathway'
        ---
        #title
        Connect with Us on Discord

        #default
        Join our community on Discord to connect with other users and get real-time assistance from our team.
        ::
        ::landing-card
        ---
        icon: 'heroicons:chat-bubble-left-ellipsis-20-solid'
        button:
            text: 'Send us an email'
            href: 'mailto:contact@pathway.com'
        ---
        #title
        Contact us

        #default
        For private inquiries or matters that are not suitable for public discussion, feel free to reach out to us via email.
        ::
    ::    
::
