---
title: 'Custom Python connectors'
description: 'Tutorial on how to create custom Python connector'
date: '2023-04-13'
thumbnail: '/assets/content/blog/th-custom-connectors.png'
tags: ['tutorial', 'connectors']
keywords: ['connector', 'Python']
---

# Creating a custom Python connector

In this tutorial, you will learn how to create a Python connector that will allow you to connect to your custom data source and feed data directly into Pathway.

In order to create a custom connector, you need to extend the [`pw.io.python.ConnectorSubject`](/developers/api-docs/pathway-io/python#pathway.io.python.ConnectorSubject) class provided by Pathway and implement the `run` method, which is responsible for reading the source and feeding the data into the buffer.  

`ConnectorSubject` serves as a bridge between the data source and the Pathway engine. It comes with several methods allowing you to push data into the buffer.
You can find more about those functions in [the dedicated documentation](/developers/api-docs/pathway-io/python). 
There is also an extended explanation [at the end](#connectorsubject-reference) of this article.

## Simple scenario: reading from a static file

You will create a connector that turns a static file into a stream. Suppose you have a file `cats.jsonl` in which each line contains data in JSON format:

```json
{ "key": 1, "genus": "otocolobus", "epithet": "manul" }
{ "key": 2, "genus": "felis", "epithet": "catus" }
{ "key": 3, "genus": "lynx", "epithet": "lynx" }
```

In the `run` method, let's read the file and send the contents to the buffer line by line, using [`next_str`](/developers/api-docs/pathway-io/python#pathway.io.python.ConnectorSubject.next_str) method. 

```python
import time
import pathway as pw

class FileStreamSubject(pw.io.python.ConnectorSubject):
  def run(self):
    with open("cats.jsonl") as file:
      for line in file:
        self.next_str(line)
        time.sleep(1)
```

You can now read from the subject you created and run computations.

You need to call the method [`pw.io.python.read`](/developers/api-docs/pathway-io/python#pathway.io.python.read), passing your subject to it. In addition, you need to specify the schema of the data, indicating the format and fields that will be extracted as columns.

```python
class InputSchema(pw.Schema):
  key: int = pw.column_definition(primary_key=True)
  genus: str
  epithet: str

table = pw.io.python.read(
  FileStreamSubject(),
  schema=InputSchema,
  format="json"
)

pw.io.csv.write(table, "output.csv")

pw.run()
```

Under the hood, the connector will be started in a dedicated thread and will continue to work as long as the [`run`](/developers/api-docs/pathway/#pathway.run) method is spinning.

## Advanced scenario: using external Python libraries

In the second example, let's utilize an external library called [Tweepy](https://docs.tweepy.org/en/latest/) to load a stream of tweets.

Tweepy is a Python library for accessing the Twitter API. You can install it with a simple pip command:

```pip install tweepy```

As a first step, you need to create a `TwitterClient` class that extends [`tweepy.StreamingClient`](https://docs.tweepy.org/en/latest/streamingclient.html#streamingclient):

```python
import tweepy

class TwitterClient(tweepy.StreamingClient):
    _subject: TwitterSubject

    def __init__(self, subject: TwitterSubject) -> None:
        super().__init__(BEARER_TOKEN)
        self._subject = subject

    def on_response(self, response) -> None:
        self._subject.next_json(
            {
                "key": response.data.id,
                "text": response.data.text,
            }
        )
```

The client holds the subject object, which will be described in a moment. The `on_response` method is called when a new response from a stream is received. This is the right place to convert the message to the desired format and send it to a subject's buffer. 
This time you can use the [`next_json`](/developers/api-docs/pathway-io/python#pathway.io.python.ConnectorSubject.next_json) method which accepts a dictionary.

As previously, you need to define the subject:

```python
import pathway as pw

class TwitterSubject(pw.io.python.ConnectorSubject):
    _twitter_client: TwitterClient

    def __init__(self) -> None:
        super().__init__()
        self._twitter_client = TwitterClient(self)

    def run(self) -> None:
        self._twitter_client.sample()

    def on_stop(self) -> None:
        self._twitter_client.disconnect()
```

Three things are happening here:

1. `TwitterClient` is created during subject initialization. The subject is accessed from within the `TwitterClient`, so you need to pass the subject to its constructor.
2. The method `run` starts the stream of tweets. Once started, the stream will flow indefinitely until it is closed or in case of failure.
3. The method `on_stop` is called when the stream is closed or in case of failure. You have a chance to perform some cleanup.

Finally, you call `pw.io.python.read` as before:

```python
class InputSchema(pw.Schema):
  key: int = pw.column_definition(primary_key=True)
  text: str

table = pw.io.python.read(
    TwitterSubject(),
    schema=InputSchema
)

pw.io.csv.write(table, "output.csv")

pw.run()
```

The complete working example can be found in the [Pathway examples](https://github.com/pathwaycom/pathway/tree/main/examples/projects/custom-python-connector-twitter) repository.

## ConnectorSubject reference

In the examples above, you can see two implementations of the [`ConnectorSubject`](/developers/api-docs/pathway-io/python#pathway.io.python.ConnectorSubject) class. Now let's look in detail at the interface of this class.

### Methods to implement
- `run`: main function responsible for consuming the data and feeding the buffer with one of the methods described below.
- `on_stop`: called when the stream is closed or in case of failure. A good place for doing all sorts of cleanup.

### Embedded methods
- [`next_bytes`](/developers/api-docs/pathway-io/python#pathway.io.python.ConnectorSubject.next_bytes): sends a message in the form of `bytes`.
- [`next_str`](/developers/api-docs/pathway-io/python#pathway.io.python.ConnectorSubject.next_str): takes a message in the form of a string and sends it after converting it into `bytes`.
- [`next_json`](/developers/api-docs/pathway-io/python#pathway.io.python.ConnectorSubject.next_json): takes a message in the form of a dict representing JSON and sends it after converting it into `bytes`.
- [`close`](/developers/api-docs/pathway-io/python#pathway.io.python.ConnectorSubject.close): indicates that there will be no more messages. Will be called automatically when the run method finishes.


## Connector method reference

The [`pw.io.python.read`](/developers/api-docs/pathway-io/python#pathway.io.python.read) connector method takes the following arguments:

- `subject`: connector subject to consume.
- `format`: in the examples above, we used the `json` format. It is also possible to use the `raw` format. For raw data, there is only one column `data` in the resulting table, where all entries are dumped.
- `value_columns`: if the format is not `raw`, it is the list of the columns which should be expected.
- `primary_key`: in case the table should have a primary key generated according to a subset of its columns, the set of columns should be specified in this field. Otherwise, the primary key will be generated as uuid4.
- `types`: a dictionary containing the mapping between the columns and the data types of the values of those columns. This parameter is optional, and if not provided the default type is string.
- `autocommit_duration_ms`: the maximum time between two commits. Every `autocommit_duration_ms` milliseconds, the updates received by the connector are committed and pushed into Pathway's dataflow.
